# General Purpose of this repository
This repository contains the model and its weights to predict the open reading frame in bacterial exon DNA samples with varying degrees of damage. If you solely want to use the tool, you only need to follow the instruction under "Use simsalabim". If you want to train your own model or reproduce the results, then follow the instructions under  "Generate data and train model".

## Use simsalabim
The tool depends on scripts and model weights in this repository. Thus, you should first clone the repository to your working directory and install the dependencies with:
<br>
```git clone https://github.com/nilshof01/ORF_prediction.git```
<br>
```pip install -r requirements.txt```
<br>
After you have cloned the repository you can run the tool. Simsalabim will output two fasta files. One ends with corr_ORFS and contains only the predicted ORFs considering the threshold (if given). The second fasta file ends with _discORFS and contains the discarded sequences which were either filtered because they are not above the given sequence length threshold or the probability of a correct prediction is below the corresponding threshold. The thresholds and input files are required or optional and given below.
<br>
#### Inputs 
- `--fastq_file`: Required. The filepath to the fastq file from which you want to predict the open reading frame.
- `--precision_thresh`: Optional. The threshold for the minimum certainty of the model to accept an open reading frame. Input type is a float in range  0 < x < 1 Default is 0.01. Thus, always the frame with the highest probability will be chosen as the correct ORF. In this mode only the reads with the sequence length < threshold_sequence_length will be discarded and saved in _discORFs.
- `--damage`: Optional. Default is "nodam". Possible input values are "nodam", "middam", "highdam"
- `--threshold_sequence_length`: Optional. Default is 32. Possible input values are 32, 35, 38, 41. The minimum sequence length as input for the model. All reads with a lower length will filtered and saved in _discORFs.
- `--save_dir`: The directory where you want to save the new files. Default is the working directory.
<br>
You can call the tool with:
<br>

```python -m ORF_prediction.simsalabim --fastq_file "path_to_my_fastq_file" --precision_thresh 0.6 --threshold_sequence_length 32```
<br>

## Generate data and train model

### Clone branch with training scripts
```bash
git clone -b chuncks https://github.com/nilshof01/ORF_prediction.git
```

### Data Preparation

The data for the training of the models is simulated using tools such as Gargammel, seqkit, leeHom and art_illumina to create reads from next generation sequencing. The script generate_reads.sh in data_preparation can be used to generate these where the read length and the number of fragments can be defined. Further the directory containing the genomes of the organisms (from ncbi) should be given. Additionally, the number of organisms from which the fragments should be generated can be given by defining max_dirs. The script generate_reads outputs for each genome one csv which can be used in furter processing steps. 
<br>
To be able to use the csv files for training the model, you have to first one-hot encode them so that you have four dimensions for the four nucleotides. The script one_hot.sh outputs six files which are:
<br>

- `--one_hot_encoded_all`: Training data for the model. Contains the trimmed reads, one-hot encoded and arranged in subsets of six, where five reads represent the true negatives and the remaining is the true positive.
- `--results_all`: Training results for the model. Contains the labels in subsets of six, where five values are 0 and one is 1.
- `--one_hot_encoded_all_val`: Validation data for the model. Contains the trimmed reads, one-hot encoded and arranged in subsets of six, where five reads represent the true negatives and the remaining is the true positive.
- `--results_all_val`: Validation results for the model. Contains the labels in subsets of six, where five values are 0 and one is 1.
- `--one_hot_encoded_all_test`: Test data for the model. Contains the trimmed reads, one-hot encoded and arranged in subsets of six, where five reads represent the true negatives and the remaining is the true positive.
- `--results_all_test`: Test results for the model. Contains the labels in subsets of six, where five values are 0 and one is 1.

#### one_hot.sh script inputs

- `--file_name`: The identifier name of the output_files - the script will attach to `one_hot_encoded_all` the given name.
- `--data_folder`: The folder where you store the csv files generated by `generate_reads.sh`.
- `--base_dir_save`: The folder where you want to store the output files.
- `--train_seq_no`: The number of sequences you want to take from each csv file for the training.
- `--val_seq_no`: The number of sequences you want to take from each csv file for validation.
- `--test_seq_no`: The number of sequences you want to take from each csv file for testing.
- `--limit_train_orgs`: The number of organisms you want to include in your train dataset (equals the number of csv files).
- `--limit_val_orgs`: The number of organisms you want to include in your validation dataset (equals the number of csv files).
- `--limit_test_orgs`: The number of organisms you want to include in your test dataset (equals the number of csv files).
- `--sequences_max_length`: The sequences length you want to have in your dataset (all sequences will have this length).

**Note**: After the one hot encoding you should zip the data because the files will be relatively large. Lastly, you need to create chunks from your training and validation dataset because the training algorithm was designed to only accept corresponding files to reduce the demand in RAM. For that, run `generate_chunks.sh` in which you have to define the following inputs:

#### generate_chunks.sh script inputs

- `--train_data`: Filepath to `one_hot_encoded_all` (training data).
- `--results_train`: Filepath to `results_all` (training labels).
- `--val_data`: Filepath to `one_hot_encoded_val` (validation data).
- `--val_results`: Filepath to `results_all_val` (validation labels).
- `--num_subsets`: Number of chunks (subsets) generated by the script.
The script will output the number of subsets for each file in the folder where the data was stored. It is necessary to have the four datasets in the same directory.

### Training
The model is fairly big and if it is trained on more than 1000 organisms with more than 1000 fragments per organism it should be trained on high performance graphic nodes.  Tesla A100 PCIE 80 GB on an LSF cluster was used to train the model and for that the modules are defined in the bashrc_script.sh which you can copy and insert in your .bashrc. Maybe, the modules could differ for different clusters or gpus so they should be adjusted if other graphic cards are used. train_nn.sh was used to submit the jobs which is based on the script src/training_model/training.py. There, one can define all relevant parameters for the training such as optimizer, batch size, data directory etc. 

## References
leeHom: adaptor trimming and merging for Illumina sequencing reads Gabriel Renaud, Udo Stenzel and Janet Kelso Nucleic Acids Research 2014 Oct;42(18):e141. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku699.
<br>
Renaud, G., Hanghoej, K., Willerslev, E. & Orlando, L. (2016). gargammel: a sequence simulator for ancient DNA Bioinformatics, btw670
<br>
Huang W, Li L, Myers JR, Marth GT. ART: a next-generation sequencing read simulator. Bioinformatics. 2012 Feb 15;28(4):593-4. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr708. Epub 2011 Dec 23. PMID: 22199392; PMCID: PMC3278762.
